Hi, my name is Doctor Johnson and I am a lecturer. Uh, I just graduated with my PhD last summer. Um, and my thesis was on high speed flows through internal, uh, somewhat like canonical scramjet engines, uh, studying the interactions of shockwaves and boundary layers. Um, I used CFD tools, uh, particularly large eddy simulation, um, to study this unsteady flow phenomena. And I'm very excited to be teaching you, uh, about propulsion this summer course. All right, so when we talk about propulsion, what exactly are we actually talking about? Um, if you could define propulsion in, uh, one sentence, um, I would say that propulsion is a force that moves you forward. So where does this fit into our physics? Framework. Um, first let's talk about Newton's laws. So Newton's laws, first law says that objects that are moving continue to move unless acted upon. A but, um, acted upon by an outside force. And the second law says that force is the product of mass and acceleration. Or another way to put it is it is the time derivative of of momentum. And then the third law says that for every action there's an equal and opposite reaction, meaning that forces are always going to be paired. Um, so these are the three laws that are going to be, uh, the most important for the quantities of interest in our propulsion applications, because again, we want to move something forward, something with mass, we want to move it forward. And that is going to be our, um, thrust force. And we're going to call it, um, thrust, which is denoted by t.

So let's talk about that force. Um, have you I'm sure you probably have. But if you take a balloon, you blow it up and you, um, pinch off the end, and then you let it go. What happens to the balloon? The balloon goes one way in the air that you put inside the balloon and goes the opposite way. So this is a representation of Newton's third law. For every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction. The air escapes to the right and the balloon moves to the left.

And this is essentially what propulsion is. What all of our complex engines boil down to is something is releasing mass to the aft direction, and the reaction of releasing that mass to the after action propels our body or our engine or whatever in the, um, forward direction.

So let's think about this from a physical molecular perspective. So if you envision a balloon like here on the screen, we have pressure forces acting all around the balloons outside. So we have the ambient pressure. So like for this room it's just going to be the standard atmospheric pressure around sea level. So we can say 101 kilo pascals. So we have this pressure acting on the outside of the balloon. And what we've done is in the process of blowing up the balloon, we have done work on the balloon, right. We've we've stretched it out. And that stretching force, which comes from the actual material of the balloon we can think of as surface tension. And it's the force that wants to compress the balloon back to its original size. Um, and in doing so, what will happen is it will shoot the air that we put into the balloon backwards, out of the throat. These two, um, forces the air going backwards, and the balloon going forwards are that pair that constitute Newton's third law. Um, so what we can think about is all these molecules inside this balloon are pushing, pushing, pushing on the inside of this balloon, trying to escape. Right. But it is balanced, right? We don't have a net acceleration. We don't have a net force because the surface tension of the latex or the mylar or whatever, um, the balloon is made of is adding with the atmospheric pressure to create a static object. So we have the air inside, which is at a higher pressure than the air outside. Um, what happens when we open the throat of the balloon or we open the mouth of the balloon? This air that is pushing, pushing, push and pushing. Now, suddenly, this higher pressure air inside sees a lower pressure environment outside. And this pressure differential is what's going to create the force that rushes the air out to the right. The reaction force from the air rushing up to the right is what creates the forward force to the left. So if we think, uh, on the balloon. So if we think of the air at the front of the balloon here is simply unknowingly pushing on the balloon to the left. And it's balanced by the surface tension of the balloon, and it's balanced by the ambient pressure outside the balloon when it suddenly has when the bloom suddenly has an opening. An air is rushing out to the right through the mouth of the balloon. What happens is over here on the left side of the balloon. It's still getting that same pressure that is now pushing on something that is lighter mass. Because we've lost the mass, right? The air rushes up to the right. So what happens when we have the same force pushing on a lighter mass? We get a net force. It's going to accelerate the balloon to the left.

All right, so let's think of the same thing in space when we have a satellite that is in space, in orbit, and it's wanting to make a maneuver or 20 to decrease or drop orbit. Um, let's say it's getting deorbited because it's reach the end of its life cycle. Um, we have to expel mass that we already have inside of our satellite into the vacuum of space to get that satellite to accelerate, um, in the direction that we want. So we don't actually have anything that we're pushing on. There is no outside medium. The air that escapes with the propellant, typically it's going to be a not air, but a propellant that's, um, inside the satellite, compressed to a very high, uh, density and pressure. We let that escape into the medium of air of space. Sorry. It's going to, again, reactively generate the net force on the satellite. That thrust force to the left, or in this case, all right. Um, so we don't actually need a medium of air or any kind of body surrounding our object to generate that reactive force. It's it's the reaction of those molecules against our, our body as it's being expelled, that is going to generate that net net force to the left. So this is how we can move satellites in orbit or in space. All right. So let's think about what this means. So a force is a time rate of change of momentum. We know that momentum is mass and velocity right. Mass and velocity. So we're changing the mass of our spacecraft by expelling mass to the right. And this is generating net force. And this net force pushes our spacecraft to the left, changing the momentum of our, um, spacecraft.

Um, so yes, this is an example. So an RCS, which is a reaction reaction control system. Um, thrusters with small pulse of device that is used to control the attitude or position of the satellite or small rocket or whatever. Um, or just a regular rocket. Um, they can use this expulsion of mass to create the net force needed to, um, maneuver in a vacuum.

Let's think about something a little more close to home. So again, we're talking about a propulsive force. Propulsion is the act of moving forward. So, um, a force that moves you forward. We're going to call it the thrust force. So we can think about riding a bicycle. You're generating a thrust force, right? The thrust force is not the force of your tire on the ground. It is the force of the ground on the tire. You're moving forward. That is the direction that your thrust force or your propulsive force is moving. The reaction force, you exerting force on the ground. Reactive force is the ground exerting its force on you, pushing the bike forward. That is our propulsive force. So it's kind of confusing because oftentimes we would think, oh, well, we're shooting this mass out to the right. So shouldn't our thrust force be going to the right where the mass is going? No, because we're actually concerned with our spacecraft in the mass that's going to shoot it out to the right is giving us a reaction force that's pushing us to the left, and that's the forward thrust force that we want to study, generate. Throughout this course.

So another thing we can think about instead of having a hard surface to push on, we have. Let's say we're swimming and we can actually push against a medium a fluid medium. We're pushing against the water. So we're still generating that forward thrust force by pushing water behind us. We're throwing mass behind us right as we push the water with our feet, as we push too hard with our hands. Um, but we now have a a slightly different scenario here, right? Because we're going forward into this medium. So now, unlike the previous two examples where in the vacuum we don't have anything pushing on us. Um, as we try to move to the left for the bicycle, we don't really have much pushing on us. Um, I mean, you can say we have air resistance, but compared to, um, the force that we're generating. Uh, with our, you know, pushing on the pedals. That's a very small force. But when we're going through this medium, we're now going to encounter some resistance right from the fluid molecules ahead of us. They don't want to be pushed out of the way. So that is going to contribute the opposite force that we um, to our thrust for. So this is going to contribute a drag force. And that drag force is the cost of us moving through a medium. And that is going to be something that, uh, we have to take into account with our air breathing propulsion devices, especially, um, we want to, um, obtain a level of thrust necessary to do our job to move us forward at the rate we want at the minimum amount of resistance. So we want the minimum amount of drag force, because eventually, if your thrust and you're drag are equal, um, you're not going to go anywhere.

All right. So let's think about all these examples that we just looked at and think about that forward force. So every propulsive system has the purpose of generating a backwards force through mass interaction, through expelling mass, through pushing on the ground, through pushing on the water that then reacts on our system, our propulsive system, to push it forward. And that reactive force is our thrust. So with the balloon, we expelled air rearward. The atmosphere or the vacuum, um, is the reacting medium. The thrust origin is that pressure imbalance from throwing mass backwards. Now we have a pressure of pushing us forwards. That's unbalanced. And that was what generated our reactive thrust force satellites. Very similar. We have the ejected propellant rearward. In this case we definitely have no medium because we're in space. So the vacuum, um, is what we are ejecting that propellant into. And what generates our thrust is our mass is changing. So now we have a change in momentum because the time rate of change of momentum is mass times velocity, DDT is mass times velocity is our force. But the bicycle, the tire pushes on the road, the road pushes on us. That normal and friction force generate our forward propulsive force swimming. We are pushing on the water. The water is pushing on us, pushing us forward. Jet engine. So this is one that we haven't talked about yet, but it's very similar to both the swimming and the balloon. balloons. We're going to expel mass backwards, and we are countered by a resistance force from the atmosphere. So when we are pushing forward into the air, the air is going to resist us. That's our drag force and our fluid reaction force. Sorry. Our propulsive force thrust is or is originated at the pressure and the momentum flux. So the change in the mass that we throw backwards and the pressure difference from our rear to our front of our aircraft or propulsive device. All right. So the principle is that Newton's third law, every force has a reaction force. Our force of interest is the forward propelling thrust force. And that is generated by throwing mass, pushing mass backwards.

In our react, the reaction force of that mass pushing back on us is what generates our forward thrust.

All right. So let's kind of solidify this a little bit in terms of mathematical equations. All right. So let's look at Newton's second law. Force is equal to a time derivative of momentum. We can think about this. As for a propulsive air breathing fluid device, it's easy to think about this as the flow rate of mass through our engine times the velocity that the mass exits our engine. So this still gives us kilograms per second times meter per second, which gives us kilogram meter per second squared. Right mass times acceleration meter acceleration is meters per second squared. So this is just a different way of writing that time rate of change of momentum. And this is going to be a very convenient way of writing that equation for our air breathing, propulsive devices in which we have steady flow. So we're not like the balloon case or the satellite case. We're not just injecting mass ejecting mass that we already have inside of us. We're breathing in the air. We're taking in air from the outside. We're doing stuff to it. We're doing work on the air. We're adding energy to the air, and then we're exhausting it. And an exit velocity from our, um, nozzle or from our engine. And that is continually happening. So that mass flow rate is going to be pretty important. So let's look at the thrust equation here. This thrust equation has that um mass flow rate times velocity uh term that we just talked about here. But it also has this pressure term. And this pressure term is taking into account the pressure at the opening of our engine and the pressure at the exit of our engine, and this pressure per area is a force, as we know. And this is going to be that drag force that we talked about. This is the resistance, this part right here. And it's pushing in in the opposite direction. It's subtracting from our forward propulsive force. Right. So that's that drag force that we talked about. The resistance of the air that we're the medium that we're moving into. So for a rocket that's just not going to exist. Right. And then we also have pressure pushing on the aft of our engine at the exit for a satellite in space. We do not have this. This does not exist because the outside medium is vacuum. So there is no pressure to push on our vehicle. Um, it is simply this mass, uh, term times the change of velocity.

Um, so let's look at that. The change of velocity for the, uh, chill off ski rocket equation. Here the change of velocity of our propellant, of our vehicle, um, due to our propulsive motion or propulsive action is the exit velocity times the initial mass over the final mass. So what that's telling us is that the velocity at which we eject the mass times a function of the change in mass of our spacecraft, is going to give us the change in velocity of our, um, spacecraft. And one of the ways that rockets, um, differ substantially from air breathing propulsion, as we're going to see later in the course, um, or I guess later next, probably next week, is that the metrics of performance are going to change, because these two processes of generating that propulsive force are fundamentally different. Right. So we're going to actually look at the specific impulse for rockets and for spacecraft, um, thrusters, satellite thrusters. And that's going to be a function of the exit velocity of the mass that we're throwing behind us over a constant, let's say, a gravitational constant. And that specific impulse is going to be our metric of, um, performance that we do not actually use for the air breathing propulsion devices.

All right. So what we've learned here, we've talked about some key mathematical variables. We've talked about Newton's laws of motion. Um, we've talked about how that propulsive force is simply a force that moves us forward and that it is, um, going to be we're going to call that thrust force in a lot of our applications where, you know, if we're riding a bicycle, we call it the propulsive force. But for everything propulsion and for rockets, we're going to call it the thrust force. And we can generate that through a vacuum. We can generate that through a medium, a continuous fluid medium such as water or air. But the principle at the heart of thrust or propulsion is that we are generating a backwards force on and on something, and that is generating a reactive force on us that pushes us forward.

All right. So this was our introduction to, um, thrust and propulsion in a kind of high level way. Um, and next we're going to look at different types of propulsion devices that you might encounter in your career as a propulsion system. Um, designer in air, sea and space.