All right, so now that we've gone over the basics of the laws of motion and our propulsive thrust force, um, let's look at how aeronautical propulsion devices operate in the real world.

We're going to talk about eight different systems. Um, you'll see, uh, propulsive systems that work in water, air and space. Um, and we're going to see different types of generative, um, propulsion devices. So stuff that uses propellers, stuff that just ejects mass. Um, we're going to kind of think about the different ways that, um, these applications can generate thrust in a way that's good or, you know, appropriate for them.

All right. So let's look at this first example, um, of this. Let's think of a container ship or a cargo ship. Huge amount of mass Um, sitting in the water. We have a buoyancy force that's keeping it afloat. So, um, all we need to do is to generate a forward motion with our propulsion system. So typically, um, a large diameter propeller is going to be used to push our cargo ship forward. Um, so it needs to generate a huge amount of force because we have a huge amount of mass on these cargo ships. Right. So typical, uh, ranges of of the thrust for a big cargo ship like this is going to be 500 Newtons. Um, and the way that the thrust is generated with these big cruise ship or cargo ships is the area of the propeller. So you can see over here on the right the huge diameter of this propeller and how much mass it can throw behind it, in large part because of that area. Um, so in terms of efficiency, we get about 60 to 70% efficiency at cruise. And this is propulsive efficiency, which we're going to define later, but we're just going to kind of use it as a comparison metric for now. Um, and the key design tradeoff is the bigger your, uh, propeller is, the, um, larger your ship needs or the lower your ship needs to sit in the water to encompass, um, that entire propulsive diameter. Right. And when you sit lower in the water, more of the body of the ship is going to be touching the fluid medium, which is going to provide more resistance. So it's kind of a trade off between how you generate the force and how much drag you get in return.

Commercial turbofan. Um, if you flew here from wherever in the United States, from Boston, perhaps, or wherever you're coming from, most likely you flew on a commercial jet, and 99% of the time, uh, you're going to be flying on a commercial jet that has, uh, uses a turbofan engine to generate its propulsion. So what is a turbofan engine? You can see on the right it's this huge nozzle with all of these blades that constitute the fan part. And kind of like the ship. Um, the ship is going to be, uh, propelling itself from aft. So from the back of the ship, the propeller is going to be pushing it forward. But with the turbofan, we're actually going to see the propeller or the fan, uh, which is basically an enclosed multi bladed propeller. It's going to be sucking the air inward from the front and pushing, uh, that air backward out of the rear of the engine. So typical thrust levels for uh, turbofan commercial jet engine is going to be um, 100 to 350 Newton. So, uh, a good bit less like a fifth to a half of the, uh, force that those cargo ships are going to generate. Um, and the key thrust driver here is also going to be from the mass flow rate, the amount of mass we can throw behind us. And, um, specifically, um, for turbofans, we're going to learn about this, um, a little bit later. But the bypass mass flow rate. So the flow that goes around the engine, not through the core of the engine, is going to be generating a lot of our, um, thrust, and we get about 60 to 75%, uh, cruise efficiency with, uh, turbofan engines. Um, and the key, again, the key trade off here is we want a very large diameter so that we can suck in a lot of air, just like the the propeller on the ship. But this makes us have to build a bigger housing for this propeller or fan. and this is going to be what we call the nice cell is what houses the, um, the fan in the engine and the drag and the weight of that are going to negatively penalize, um, the diameter. So that's kind of the trade off that we're going what we're dealing with for turbofans. So now let's look at a simpler turboprop engine. Um, I say simpler, but essentially it's a turbofan. But it's unhoused, right. The fan part is just four blades. So a propeller and it's unhoused. So it's not inside that in itself. Um, and we're going to learn about the reasons that this is, um, done. Why would you use, you know, an outside, um, turbo propeller rather than a inside fan? Um, and the reason is a lot because of is mainly due to the tip speed and how those fan blades or those propeller blades generate extremely fast speeds at the tips as they're rotating and the air's moving over them. So it's going to be um, we're going to talk about that later. So you don't really need to worry about that now. But again, the key thrust driver is the mass that we can throw behind us by increasing the area of our propeller or the diameter of our propeller. Um, and these guys get really good efficiency so they can get 80 to 85%, um, efficiency, propulsive efficiency at their design speed. So there is a reason why these guys exist. There are certain, um, uh, there are certain flight ranges and missions that are actually, you know, quite well suited to turboprops. So they still exist and they're used for, um, shorter like regional missions and stuff. But, um, the trade off here again, we're going to see that the efficiency of the propeller Versus the tip compressibility limit. So that is related to the tip speed, um, which is something we'll discuss further down in the course.

Um, oh, and also these guys generate, uh, a good bit less thrust. So 20 to 50 killer Newtons. Um, so again, about half to a fifth of what we just saw for the turbofan.

And let's take a retrospective look even farther back to the very first, um, reciprocating propeller driven plane. So the propulsive device in this case is still a propeller, but instead of having a an engine where the air flows through it, we get a, um, a slightly different approach here. We get a reciprocating engine. So something like your car engine right where it's operating on the auto cycle, Otto. And it is not. It's sucking in air. Still air breathing, but it's not actually pulling air through a core in an axial direction. It's just doing that piston cylinder motion. So, um, this is where we started. This is what, um, the reciprocating engine is the history of flight. Uh, that is where that really began. So these were the type of planes that were used, like in World War Two. They were using reciprocating engines. Um, thrust is a lot smaller. So 2 to 15 killer Newtons. They are pretty good propulsive, um, efficiency. So like the turboprop, which we just saw, um, the propeller driven propulsion systems are pretty efficient. So that's one of the reasons that they're still around. Um, all right. So let's move forward. Quadcopters. So this is a much, much, much smaller application than what we've been talking about. We've gone from huge cargo ships to um, standard passenger, uh, commercial aircraft with the turbofan to smaller regional aircraft, with the turboprop to the um single or double passenger reciprocating piston engines of the World War Two era 1930s. Now we're going even smaller. We're going to a, uh, to a quad core quadcopter. And you might wonder, well, how this doesn't go forward, right? I mean, it does go forward, but it generates the thrust in a unique way, right? So quadcopters and helicopters in general, they are um, situated primarily to hover. Right? So their propellers are going to be generating the most of their or all of their lift force. And in order to generate their thrust force, they have to change the speed of their, um, rear versus for or aft versus for propellers. Or they have to tilt their rotors like helicopters typically tilt the rotor, um, to to angle some of that lift force in the forward direction. And that's what's going to generate their thrust force. Um, so the thrust of a quad copter for a typical, you know, drone that you might buy at the store is going to be 5 to 40 Newtons. So we've gone from, um, 500 Newtons down to five Newtons. So this is tiny, tiny, tiny amount of thrust compared to that cargo ship. Um, we can see that the key thrust driver is, again, that disk area, um, and how fast you can get your, uh, rotor to move. So the propulsive efficiency of these guys is actually really low, so it's actually not very good. Um, for for hovering you. You saw that, you know, our airplanes were getting much higher efficiency, like, um, 65, 75, 85 for the for the turboprop And, um, key trade off here is going to be how much it weighs to the battery weight and how much, uh, time it can stay in the air. So how about what the hover endurance is?

Military turbojet. So now we're going to move back to a very different application, something that needs to go extremely fast, have very high maneuverability and some where you don't care quite as much about propulsive efficiency because your goal is not to, uh, cheaply and safely move people across the country on like a commercial chat. But it is to be able to outrun your opponent, outmaneuver your opponent, and generate huge amounts of thrust at, um, very fast and very responsive rates. So here we're going to get 50 to 100 killer Newtons, up to 150 killing Newtons with our afterburners. Let's go back and see The commercial turbofan was 103 50 Newton. So about the same amount of thrust, right. Or even less thrust. Um, but something that we're going to, um, see later in the course. The difference between these is how quickly, uh, how fast you can actually fly. So that thrust, right is proportional to the change of momentum with time. And like we said, with a fighter jet, you want to change your momentum in a very short amount of time. With the commercial jet you're mostly cruising. So you want to maximize your efficiency at cruise. So you're going to go a speed that's reasonable, um, that you don't get shocks, you know, you know, transcend the sonic barrier. But, um, that you go fast enough that people are going to still fly on your airplane and buy tickets. But for a turbojet, um, which are typically going to be found on fighter jet engines or on fighter planes, um, you really don't care about efficiency quite as much. You really want to go as fast as possible in a really short amount of time. You want to change your direction, you want to have that very high maneuverability to out, um, flank your opponents in combat. And the key thrust driver here, unlike the previous examples where we've seen that the key thrust driver is the amount of mass that you can throw behind you with your big propeller, with your big fan. Here we see that the key thrust driver is the speed at which you throw that mass behind you. So it's not the amount of mass you you don't actually see most of the thrust coming from the mass flow rate, the term, you're going to see it coming from the change in velocity. So you're going to see that how fast we can accelerate the smaller amount of mass through our engine is going to drive our, um, is our key thrust driver for these type of fighter jets. Look how low the propulsive efficiency. So if you're cruising supersonic in a turbojet, uh, with a turbojet engine, your propulsive efficiency is 25 to 40%. So that's very low. Right. So you're trading your amount of thrust that you can generate, um, for propulsive efficiency and the, uh, fuel burn. The thrust specific fuel consumption, which is a performance parameter. We're going to talk about more later. That is very important for air breathing propulsion. Um, that's going to kind of govern the trade off. So how quickly can you generate thrust for using the least amount of fuel possible so that you can maintain that high maneuverability, high speed, for a longer combat in, um, aerial combat scenarios?

All right. Going now to, uh, from air breathing or, um, ocean breathing, I guess, uh, propulsion devices to stuff that needs to go in the vacuum of space so we can't breathe in air. We can't take in mass from the environment and throw it behind us. We've got to have all the mass that we need inside of us already. So this is where we get, um, chemical rocket engines. They generate. How much thrust? 1 to 9 million newtons. So 1.129 mega newtons. That's a thousand times what we were seeing with our, uh, cruise. Um, like our commercial, uh, turbofans at cruise, right? A thousand times. So what is the deal with that? Why do we have to generate so much thrust with rockets? It's because we have to overcome Earth's gravity in order to, um, get out of Earth's gravitational pull and and insert objects into orbit. So rockets have to potentially fly to the moon or Mars. But most often we're just sending them to low-Earth orbit to put satellites into orbit or other things. Um, so what are the key thrust drivers here? The exhaust velocity is going to be huge. So you see this huge bell shaped nozzle. That is what is going to accelerate our gas from subsonic to high supersonic Mach numbers. And the exhaust velocity or the amount that we can generate, um, we can accelerate our relatively smaller mass flow rate, um, is going to be the key driver of the thrust here. So similar to the turbojet engine where you care about getting thrust, um, in a short amount of time, they have lower efficiency. I mean, rocket has terrible efficiency. Um, so we don't actually use the typical propulsive efficiency that we do for air breathing devices for rockets. Again, we're going to use that specific impulse. So it's a different measure of, of propulsive efficiency. Um, and the key design tradeoffs that we encounter here with rockets are how much thrust can we generate versus the specific impulse that we can create. So how much thrust or force per time.

All right. And now we're going to talk about a final device. We're going to talk about an ion thruster. So this is a relatively new concept in propulsion. And it's been um designed and developed to fill a gap where we want to send stuff into space that has very low mass, because we have to launch it with our rocket, and rockets have to generate a huge amount of thrust in proportion to the amount of mass they have to, uh, get out of its gravity. So we want lightweight stuff to put in space, right? And also, once we're in space, we want those things to be able to go for a long time. Um, but typically we want our, um, lifetime of our, um, devices that we put into space to be long because we don't have to deorbit it and launch another thing. It's expensive. So there's a new type of propulsion that is generated by throwing a tiny amount of mass tiny, tiny, microscopic little ions, amount of particles, iron charged particles behind us with a huge velocity. So we accelerate those ions at enormous exit speeds. And that is what generates our thrust. So look how many, um, Newtons of thrust were generated here. 0.1 to 250 million newtons. So 1,000th of a Newton, which was what we were seeing on the order of for like quadcopters. So very, very small amounts of thrust, however, you have to you have to accelerate such a small amount of mass, it's so lightweight that the thrust accumulates and your Acceleration. It's almost indefinite, right? You can keep accelerating, accelerating in space to higher and higher speeds by throwing these tiny amounts of mass behind you. And finally, let's just go back to our basic physics. Um, thrust is equal to mass flow rate times our change in velocity or mass times acceleration. So we saw that propellers on giant cargo ships throw huge amounts of mass behind them at a very low change in velocity, and an ion thruster throws a tiny amount of mass behind it at huge velocities. Right. So we have to we have trade offs for different applications between how much drag we have to, um, combat and resistance, how much, uh, weight we want, our air, our propulsion device to both carry or be able to move. Um, this the efficiency is a constraint. So for different applications that you might see in your career, if you go into propulsion engineering, um, you're going to be working with Mega Newtons for rockets or Milli Newtons for ion thrusters. Um, you're going to be working with air breathing devices that want to pull in huge amounts of, of mass flow rate, like, uh, like turboprops or turbo, um, fans, or you're going to be working with, uh, a smaller amount of a mass flow rate, but you want to accelerate it to higher and higher velocities, like for a turbojet. Um, so we've kind of seen a wide breadth of different applications, but I think this should be exciting to see what all goes into moving people forward in the aerospace or aeronautical sphere, and how the thrust, the force that we want to generate to move us forward is, is still the governing principle behind all of these devices.